Explain how to create a custom pattern (#1748)
plone/documentation: docs/classic-ui/mockup.md

|   |   ├── testpattern.test.js
│   ├── bundle.js
│   ├── index.html
│   ├── index.js
├── package.json
├── webpack.config.js
...
```

All your pattern JavaScript code goes into {file}`resources/pat-testpattern/testpattern.js`.
SCSS files can be imported, too, since webpack provides the `sass-loader` module.

Next, install the npm packages using {term}`yarn`.

```shell
yarn install
```

When you finish writing your JavaScript code, you have to build the bundle with the following command.

```shell
yarn build
```

This creates the webpack chunks and the JavaScript bundle files in your add-on package.

```text
...
├── src
|   ├── project
|   |   ├── addon
|   |   |   ├── browser
|   |   |   |   ├── static
|   |   |   |   |   ├── bundles
|   |   |   |   |   |   ├── chunks
|   |   |   |   |   |   ├── addon-remote.min.js
|   |   |   |   |   |   ├── addon-remote.min.js.map
|   |   |   |   |   |   ├── addon.min.js
|   |   |   |   |   |   ├── addon.min.js.map
```

Note that `plonecli` also creates an XML file in {file}`src/project/addon/profiles/default/registry/bundles.xml`, which registers the {file}`addon-remote.min.js` file in the resource registry.

```{important}

> You must re-import your profile with an upgrade step if you installed your add-on in Plone before adding the pattern.

Reviewer: How does one do this step?

Author: Simplest way: uninstall/install the addon

I searched for the genericsetup documentation and got a huge old document here https://5.docs.plone.org/develop/addons/components/genericsetup.html#upgrade-steps which is still 85% valid ... would be goot to polish it and take it over to the actual docs.

Reviewer: Yeah, GenericSetup docs have not been ported to Plone 6 yet. I don't know which parts are valid or not. We can do a separate PR for them. I can convert this file https://github.com/plone/documentation/blob/5.2/develop/addons/components/genericsetup.rst from .rst to .md, then you can fiddle with it. Where should its content go? I think most of it is how-to guide.

Author: That would be great. Best place would be inside a "howto create a backend addon" guide

Reviewer: I created a new issue to track this at https://github.com/plone/documentation/issues/1754

Reviewer: PR started in https://github.com/plone/documentation/pull/1757

```

> You can test your pattern now with the browser view `@@addon-pattern-demo` (see {file}`/src/project/addon/browser/pattern-demo.pt`)

Reviewer: Can you explain further? Do I load something in a web browser? What does the file have to do with testing?

Author: ah ok ... its not really a test but a demo setup how to integrate your patter in a template.
This is accessible through the browser with `http://localhost:8080/Plone/@@addon-pattern-demo` depending on the development port setup and the Plone Site ID.

Not sure if we should mention it at all but instead explain how its done with css class (see below)

Reviewer: I'll go with what you think is best. We don't need to document all usage, but the most useful to developers. I added an example of the class, and if that is "best", then let's go with it.

Author: I updated the info for the demo browser view. see https://github.com/plone/documentation/pull/1748/commits/b25cf80328a3fbcc911d702a7d2195a4a2858456 ...  lets keep it that way.

> Alternatively you can implement it in your own templates by adding the CSS class `pat-testpattern` to a tag.

Reviewer: Does this mean, for example, `<some_html_tag class="pat-testpattern">`?

Author: yes exactly ... maybe better explain the usage here instead of mentioning the demo browser view.

Reviewer: Done in 2e0e275897d4f6e6881c2d6c13ce721322be33b4

plonecli -l
```

## Create a custom pattern

> To create a custom {term}`pattern` in your add-on, use the `mockup_pattern` {term}`bobtemplate`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a custom {term}`pattern` in your add-on, use the `mockup_pattern` {term}`bobtemplate`.
```

```shell
cd project.addon
plonecli add mockup_pattern
```

Next, enter your pattern name without the `pat-` prefix
In the following example, its name is `testpattern`.

```shell
--> Pattern name (without “pat-” prefix) [my-pattern]: testpattern
```

This creates the necessary JavaScript resources and webpack configuration for you, as shown in the following file system tree diagram.

```text
...
├── resources
|   ├── pat-testpattern
|   |   ├── documentation.md
|   |   ├── testpattern.js
|   |   ├── testpattern.scss
|   |   ├── testpattern.test.js
│   ├── bundle.js
│   ├── index.html
│   ├── index.js
├── package.json
├── webpack.config.js
...
```

All your pattern JavaScript code goes into {file}`resources/pat-testpattern/testpattern.js`.
SCSS files can be imported, too, since webpack provides the `sass-loader` module.

Next, install the npm packages using {term}`yarn`.

```shell
yarn install
```

When you finish writing your JavaScript code, you have to build the bundle with the following command.

```shell
yarn build
```

> This creates the webpack chunks, the JS bundle files, a demo browser view in your addon package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This creates the webpack chunks, the JavaScript bundle files, and a demo browser view in your add-on package.
```

```text
...
├── src
|   ├── project
|   |   ├── addon
|   |   |   ├── browser
|   |   |   |   ├── static
|   |   |   |   |   ├── bundles
|   |   |   |   |   |   ├── chunks
|   |   |   |   |   |   ├── addon-remote.min.js
|   |   |   |   |   |   ├── addon-remote.min.js.map
|   |   |   |   |   |   ├── addon.min.js
|   |   |   |   |   |   ├── addon.min.js.map
|   |   |   |   ├── pattern-demo.pt
```

> There is also a XML file in `src/project/addon/profiles/default/registry/bundles.xml` which registers the `addon-remote.min.js` in the resources registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also an XML file in {file}`src/project/addon/profiles/default/registry/bundles.xml` which registers the {file}`addon-remote.min.js` in the resources registry.
```

```{important}

> You must re-import your profile with an upgrade step if you installed your add-on in Plone before adding the pattern by uninstall/install the addon in the controlpanel or writing a genericsetup upgrade step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must re-import your profile with an upgrade step if you installed your add-on in Plone before adding the pattern.
Uninstall, then re-install, the add-on in the control panel.
Alternatively you can write a GenericSetup upgrade step.
```

```

> You can access the demo browser view in your browser with `http://localhost:8080/Plone/@@addon-pattern-demo`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can access the demo browser view in your browser with `http://localhost:8080/Plone/@@addon-pattern-demo`.
```
